[THEME MUSIC]
>>We are in the
midst of what appears
to be a colossal and
history-making blackout.
>>People trapped in
elevators and buildings.
They have activated the
emergency command center.
>>You're staggering, trying
to take in as much information
as you can.
>>Mayor Bloomberg's advice
is to go straight home.
>>The subway system is down.
>>Ottawa strictly
without power now.
>>And a lightning-quick
domino series of failures.
>>Gotta go to the bathroom
and you can't even go nowhere.
>>50 million people are
thought to have lost power.
>>In 2003, a massive
blackout struck major areas
of the US and Canada and was
perceived as a wake-up call
for the nation.
>>We've got a real
crisis in our grid,
and this is why, despite
being a super power,
we have a grid that is
comparable to a third-world
country, and that's not right.
>>GEORGE NOORY: So
you just saw that.
What a horrible situation that
occurred in August of 2003.
More than 50 million
Americans and in Canada
were struck by the
power grid going down.
It was just an
unbelievable situation.
And it could get worse.
Our special guest on "Beyond
Belief" is Bob Akart.
Bob has written several books.
One is, of course, "EMP,"
which we'll tell you about.
The other is "Cyber Warfare."
And then there's a third
attack that could hit us,
and that comes
from God, the sun.
I want you to take a
look at Bob's profile.
>>Imagine an end to
life as you know it.
Society is collapsing, and
life-threatening dangers
are all around you.
For doomsday
prepper Bobby Akart,
this is not science fiction.
It's a way of life.
Bobby theorizes
true-to-life scenarios
that would follow
catastrophic events,
like economic collapse,
a breakdown of society,
and cyber warfare.
He's a five-time number-one
Amazon best-selling author
of two series, the nonfiction
"Prepping for Tomorrow,"
and the post-apocalyptic
fiction "Boston Brahmin."
Bobby and his wife live a life
of sustainable preparedness
in the woods of
the Appalachians.
And he has tips that one
day may just save your life.
>>NOORY: Well, there you go.
I don't have to
introduce you, Bob.
>>BOBBY AKART:
Thank you, George.
>>NOORY: Welcome.
Good to talk to you again.
>>AKART: Well, thank you
very much for having me on.
I appreciate it.
>>NOORY: By the way, you
did a great job for us
on the "Coast to
Coast" radio show.
>>AKART: That was very fun.
It's the fastest two
hours of my life.
I'll be honest with you.
>>NOORY: Well, this is going
to be a fast hour for you, too.
Let me tell you that this is
a subject that, as you know,
is so dear to my heart.
I have been watching
this, monitoring
this story and the possibility
of what could happen
to our grid for years now.
We've got to get it fixed.
>>AKART: Yes, and it's
really unfathomable
that people have not
taken this more seriously.
The EMP Commission, which I
know you are very familiar with,
started to, as I say,
ring the clarion bell
about the threat of EMP, both
man-made and, as you mentioned,
God-create from a solar flare.
Our country is so
dependent upon electricity
and the small circuitry
involving our telephones
and our computers.
And we're talking about
massive pulses of energy
that would take
every bit of that
and fry it and send
us back to the 1800s.
And the resulting societal
collapse of an event like that
is unimaginable.
In my fiction series,
as was mentioned,
I tried to imagine that,
because sometimes I
think the reader
would have the ability
to visualize through the works
of fiction what could truly
happen in a nonfiction
reality world.
>>NOORY: And I'm not
sure people, Bob, really
understand the
significance of what
happens when the power grid
goes down for any unusually
large amount of time.
I mean, so in the winter time if
you lose power for a few hours,
it's inconvenient and you
question it and you get upset,
but it comes back on.
It's not coming back on
with this right away.
>>AKART: That's right.
And everyone's experience
that, as you know,
a lightning storm
or a snowstorm.
Something has caused their
power to go out at some point.
But they know it's coming back.
It always does.
But in the event of an EMP,
whether from a solar flare
or a nuclear-delivered
weapon, or in the case of new
technology--
>>NOORY: A cyber attack.
>>AKART: A cyber attack
that's coordinated,
the grid can be taken
down, and it may not
come back for many years.
And we live in a
society that folks
are used to having everything at
their fingertips-- the grocery
stores, what they call
just-in-time inventory
operations, where there's only
enough food in a grocery store
shelf to last two or three
days at any given time.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
And then the run hits,
and they're done.
>>AKART: When the
run hits, it's done.
And one of the
misconceptions, I believe,
and you read and
hear this often,
is that for the first
72 hours or so, people
will come together and
coalesce around each other
to protect each other.
I see a lot in the news
where at the drop of a hat,
society collapses.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>AKART: It could be
that your favorite sports
team won the Super Bowl, and
then they go loot and riot.
Or if they lose,
they do the same.
Imagine if the
power grid goes out,
and everyone knows the
power is not coming back
for a significant time.
I think society will
collapse quickly.
>>NOORY: I think so, too.
There's an old twilight zone
episode called "The Shelter."
And this was during
the Cold War.
And this fellow built a fallout
shelter, a bomb shelter,
for his family.
Well, the neighborhood
knew about it,
but everybody laughed at
it, until one day they
had an alarm that we were
being attacked by the Soviets.
And everybody wanted to
get into his shelter.
He had enough food in there
to last for his family,
but people are trying to
smash down his house door.
It was horrible.
The neighborhood went
absolutely crazy.
And in the fitting
way of Rod Serling,
it turned out to
be a false alarm.
And people started walking
away back to their homes.
But it showed the
reality of what
people will do when they're put
under that kind of pressure.
And the same thing
would happen here.
>>It happens so
fast, in my opinion.
And the thing about
these events-- I
call them collapse events.
And it could be a cyber
attack or a solar flare,
EMP, even economic collapse.
When these collapse
events occur,
it's not the event itself that
causes the pain to humans,
whether it be in
starvation or death.
It's the way we react to each
other under that pressure.
And what I have hoped to
do with my series of books
is to not only entertain
but inform and then take it
to one additional level.
Identify the threats
that we face as a country
so they can make an informed
decision if it's realistic.
Then instruct them on what they
can do to survive until order
is restored.
>>NOORY: If order is restored.
>>If order is restored.
And if it's not,
then they will be
able to live that life
of the 1800s, which is
sustainable through gardening.
And you may not have
TV and electricity,
but you can certainly survive.
And you have to be able
to adopt that mindset.
>>NOORY: So, Bob,
not everybody is
going to be able to
sustain themselves.
I mean, if you have
a farm, you might
be able to get by
for a little bit.
But if you live in the city,
you don't have a backyard,
you're not going to be able
to grow enough food to sustain
yourself for a long time.
This is where the
committees have projected
90% of the American public-- 90%
of 300 million people; that's
270 million people-- will
be dead within one year
if there's a solar flare, a
cyber attack, or an EMP attack.
>>AKART: That's right.
And you're referring to
the EMP Commission, which
did extensive research,
called on the brightest
minds, the best of the best
from the scientific community,
as well as sociologists,
and said, what would
happen in an event like this?
And they issued a report.
And the sad thing is,
we never acted on it.
In typical government
fashion, they talked about it,
but they didn't take
the necessary steps.
And by not publicizing this more
and by taking these major cyber
events, which we've
experienced recently,
and the threat of North
Korea, for example,
with an EMP attack,
and not making it
front-page news is doing
a disservice to Americans.
Why not be prepared?
>>NOORY: Oh, my gosh.
It's insurance.
>>AKART: It's insurance.
I mean, people pay insurance
for a tornado or a flood.
>>NOORY: Their car.
>>AKART: Never file a
claim their entire life.
What's so bad about
having extra water
and food and medical
supplies in your home just
to ride out the storm?
For one thing, to me
it's the right thing
to do so you're not a
burden on first responders
who need to maybe care for
the elderly or children who
need that help.
And then you'll be able
to sustain yourself
until order is restored,
if it is restored.
>>NOORY: If it is restored.
And we're going to talk
about those possibilities.
And there are three
major possibilities.
And by the way,
Bob Akart is also
one of several people
on this planet who
are trying to wake up
everybody to tell them
about these dangers.
There's William Forstchen.
There's F. Michael Maloof.
I'd like to throw myself in that
category, and Bob Akart, who--
they're trying to tell
everybody about the dangers
of a solar flare from the sun,
a cyber attack on the grid,
or an EMP, an Electronic
Magnetic Pulse attack that
could take the grid system.
Now, we went out to
the streets to talk
to people about these
issues to see if they even
know what they are.
>>It doesn't feel protected, no.
>>The power grid
is not protected.
>>Depends on what we're
protecting them against.
But in general, not as much
as they should be protected.
>>Natural disasters can
totally cut out technology.
>>Oh, generally speaking, I
think the grid is fairly safe
and that power outages
are relatively rare,
and they are fixed
relatively quickly.
>>I don't believe the power
grid is well protected, no.
>>NOORY: So you've got
some Americans, Bob,
who are somewhat
aware of this, maybe
because we've been pounding away
at this for a couple of years.
But what I'd like to
do is talk about this
in three different categories--
the solar flare, the EMP
attack, and that
is the detonation
of a nuke high atop our
atmosphere that would have
this trickle-down
effect, and then a cyber
attack, which we just
saw happen in the Ukraine
when some employee working
at the power system willingly
or otherwise opened
up an e-mail,
and a virus attacked and
shut down the power system.
It's unbelievable.
But let's talk first of
all about solar flares.
Back in the 1800s, we
had the Carrington Event.
And the Carrington Event, named
after Professor Carrington,
was a huge solar flare
that knocked out the only
electrical thing we had
going on at the time,
and that was that
the telegraph system.
It fried railroad
ties and the metal.
It was unbelievable.
If that flare were to
hit today, and we've
dodged a couple of them,
it would shut the grid
down for how long?
>>AKART: Well, at the time
we were not a wired society.
We didn't have the
types of interconnection
that we have now.
But it was devastating, and
people's headsets all caught
on fire.
I mean, they had their
equipment catching on fire.
If that happened
today, if we got
a direct hit of a
geomagnetic storm,
those charged particles--
>>NOORY: An X-something.
>>AKART: Yes.
I mean, there's a range,
and it goes all the way up.
When that geomagnetic
storm and those
charged particles hit
our Earth's atmosphere,
the atmosphere would
spread the particles out
before they came and
actually struck Earth.
If we didn't have an
atmosphere, it would just
come down and hit one spot.
So that electromagnetic
pulse, naturally created,
would spread.
And everything with these
circuits, these small circuits,
including power
lines and anything
that's connected to
the grid, would not
be able to absorb the
strength and the impact
of those particles.
Your surge protectors
would not be sufficient.
Now, there's a way to
protect your electronics.
And we can talk about that.
But the bottom line is a
naturally occurring solar flare
could do that to us.
And we dodged a bullet, as you
mentioned, a couple of summers
ago.
>>NOORY: It went out
the side of the sun.
It wasn't facing us directly.
>>AKART: We missed
it by about a week.
As our Earth's rotation
went around the sun--
>>NOORY: We lucked out.
>>AKART: If the timing had been
just a little bit different,
there would have
been nothing that we
could have done about it, and we
would have taken a direct hit.
>>NOORY: How long does it take
these particles to hit us,
a couple days?
>>AKART: Well, it depends on
the strength and intensity.
But fortunately, NASA has a
incredible satellite system
that reports these
active regions.
The sun has holes.
And if you go-- in fact,
I have an app on my phone
that warns me when an
active region is flaring up.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>AKART: Oh, yeah.
Trust me.
When you fly a couple
thousand miles from home,
you think about these things.
What happens?
OK, bye, George.
I'm going home.
>>NOORY: Uh-huh.
I'm on my way.
>>AKART: These
flares are monitored.
These active regions
are monitored.
And this plasma is
ejected from the sun.
And they can tell based
upon computer models
if we're at risk of that
ejection hitting us,
the coronal mass ejection.
>>NOORY: Well, and they
do let us know sometimes.
I mean, through
the radio industry,
we get told we've got
a flare coming our way.
It could be disruptive to
some kinds of communication.
But these are small.
These are M size or C size.
>>AKART: Or even maybe at an
X1, which is on the low end.
And you'll get warnings of GPS.
You may have recalled
years ago that there
was an issue with airline
traffic from England
to the United States.
And they had to
reroute airline traffic
because the geomagnetic
storm had dipped down so
low near Iceland
in areas that they
were afraid it would disrupt
the navigation systems.
The real question
is-- NASA will know
if a major storm is coming.
And as we've
discussed, the question
would be, will our
government inform us
that a major storm is coming
in fear that if they do,
perhaps the society will
panic in advance or maybe
unnecessarily.
Because these things
aren't 100% predictable.
>>NOORY: They do
warn us to date.
I would think that
in the flare episode,
they would probably
say something.
We have an X8
coming or whatever.
Prepare yourselves.
But here's the problem, Bob.
What happens if we get hit
with an X25 like Carrington.
What do we do?
>>AKART: Well--
>>NOORY: With an
uninsulated grid.
>>AKART: Yes.
There's nothing we can do.
And in my opinion,
what would happen
is that our
government would rally
their different
mechanisms for protection.
>>NOORY: For themselves, for
government to keep going.
>>AKART: Command and control
of the military, things
like continuity of government.
>>NOORY: NORAD.
>>AKART: Yeah.
All of those things
would immediately
hunker down,
probably very quietly
if they want to keep it
silent, with the hopes
of being able to not
only protect the United
States in the aftermath,
but to try to help
as many citizens as possible.
But the fact of the matter
is, our government does not
have enough stored food
rations, MREs, other means
to take care of everybody.
And that's why the EMP
commission suggested
that if we have a prolonged
power outage, regardless
of the cause, up to 90%
of Americans could die.
And then the question becomes,
how quickly will that happen?
They suggest within 12 months.
>>NOORY: Oh, my God.
We saw what happened when
Hurricane Katrina hit,
how the Environmental
Protection Agency, how FEMA,
that they were hopeless and
helpless to get anything done.
It was a disaster of mini
biblical proportions.
Magnify this around the country.
>>AKART: Well, Katrina
is a great example.
You have stories in
the press-- and you
mentioned Ukraine and others--
that the threat is real.
I've written books showing
people that the threat is real.
But whether they believe it for
themselves is another story.
When Katrina was coming, the
whole country saw it coming.
But yet, there were people
who decided to remain behind
because they thought
they could ride it out
or didn't take it serious.
>>NOORY: Didn't think it was
going to be as bad as it was.
>>AKART: And it cost
them their lives,
or they were standing on
rooftops when the water was
up to their gutters.
And the first thing
you have to do
is educate people, show them
that the threat is real.
The second thing
you have to do is
convince them to
pay attention so
that when that threat
is coming, they know
how to react and deal with it.
And it's a two-pronged approach.
There's one thing
studying the science
and talking about how it could
happen and give examples.
But it's another
step to show people
how to be prepared
and get ready for it.
>>NOORY: I think so, too.
Ted Koppel is another one
who is trying to wake us up
to these possibilities, a
cyber attack, which we'll
get into in just a second here.
But with the sun, you
just can't control it.
And you just don't know
when, because it's not timed.
>>AKART: Well, at least from
history and as our knowledge
base allows, we have never
had a solar flare that
could be as intense as
the type of EMP weapons
that are available
to rogue nations,
and there are several, the
bad actors in the world.
And the best hope with
a solar flare is A,
we will have notice,
and then B, hopefully it
will not be as intense as
a nuclear-delivered EMP
from whatever source.
And I have to have
hope that if people
will take some minimal
steps to prepare,
it just takes a
little bit of effort.
>>NOORY: OK, now let's get
into some of your works,
first of all, "Cyber Warfare,"
of course, by Bobby Akart.
Department of Defense
member Leon Panetta
has been warning people for
years about this possibility
as well.
>>US officials say a cyber
attack against Aramco,
the world's largest
oil producer,
has been traced to
hackers inside Iran,
another volley in an
increasingly high stakes war
going on in cyberspace.
And Defense Secretary
Panetta warns
potential enemies,
including Iran,
are developing the capability
to launch devastating attacks.
>>The collective result
of these kinds of attacks
could be a cyber Pearl
Harbor, an attack that
would cause physical
destruction and the loss
of life, an attack that would
paralyze and shock the nation
and create a new profound
sense of vulnerability.
>>NOORY: Now, Bobby, that
was three or four years ago
he said that.
How much have we done
since he warned everybody?
Zilch.
>>AKART: The best we can.
But here's the thing, and he's
exactly right about likening it
to at Pearl Harbor scenario.
But the difference with a
cyber attack, as I like to say,
is we won't know from
whom or from where,
but we'll certainly know when
we get hit with a cyber attack.
And the problem is it
could be an army, part
of the PLA in China who has a
whole division dedicated to--
>>NOORY: As we do.
>>AKART: As do as,
and we've used them.
The Russians have
used it as well.
Or it could be some snotty-nosed
kid in his mom's basement
in his PJs--
>>NOORY: Who's smart.
>>AKART: He's smart and
figures out a way to do it.
It's entirely possible.
An overused phrase, which I will
say, but it is very fitting,
it's not a matter
of if but when.
Because every
minute of every day,
these hackers are conducting
penetration testing, or what
they call pen testing,
looking for vulnerabilities
in systems that
involve our utilities,
our critical infrastructure.
There's not a day
that goes by where
you don't read about
a hack of a government
agency or a major business.
>>NOORY: The IRS got
hit, and they just
announced that it was more
extensive than they first
reported.
>>AKART: Exactly.
And the public doesn't pay
attention to these things,
although it's in the news daily,
until it affects them directly.
And unfortunately, in order
to get action sometimes,
especially at the highest
levels of government,
you have to actually have the
public be directly affected.
The problem with cyber
warfare and cyber attacks,
as well as EMP, is when we get
affected by devastating attacks
like those, it will be
too late to do anything.
And the time to act is now.
And it can be done,
but in the event
our government doesn't take
action, then we as individuals
can do things as well.
>>NOORY: Well, if they
don't take action,
there's something going on here.
There's something very strange.
Now, we saw what
happened in the Ukraine,
where a hacker sent an
e-mail into the system,
and some unwitting employee--
or maybe he was part of it,
who knows?-- opened up
the virus in the e-mail,
and it attacked
the power system.
It shut them down.
>>AKART: Exactly.
And that's the way it works.
And computers all over the
world could be affected
and you wouldn't even know it.
These sophisticated
attacks usually
involve multiple approaches.
In the case of the Ukraine,
the first thing they did
is they attacked
the phone system.
They took out communications
within that area.
>>NOORY: It was planned.
>>AKART: It all
planned, very tactical.
And the Russians are good.
I mean, this is in many events
a precursor to war for Russia.
When they attacked Estonia and
Georgia back in 2007, 2008,
in that time frame, the
first thing they did
is they undermined those
nations through cyber attacks.
And then they conducted
the military drills.
Recently, after the plane
was shot down in Turkey--
you're aware of that.
>>NOORY: The Russian plane.
>>AKART: The
Russians then started
attacking the Turkish
government and their critical
infrastructure, trying
to find vulnerabilities,
basically to teach
Turkey a lesson.
In recent days-- and
this is something
to watch-- the
Russians have massed
significant numbers of
troops and military hardware
into Armenia, which is a
bordering nation of Turkey.
If you start to see cyber
attacks in the news picking up
that Turkey is
reporting, then there
could be something bigger on
the horizon in the Middle East.
>>NOORY: How easy is it,
Bob, to get into the system
to shut down the grid?
>>AKART: Well, what
a hacker is looking
for is what I call
a vulnerability,
and many know those as
zero day vulnerabilities,
meaning that they are constantly
looking for a system flaw.
And then once they
find that flaw,
they exploit it by inserting
malware or a virus, as you say,
before the IT professionals
on the other end
can find a way to
protect their system.
So hundreds of thousands
of people around the world
are using proxy servers.
So Sony Pictures, for
example, gets hacked,
and then those emails
are distributed.
And that's an economic
issue, but those hacks
may have come through a
server based in Argentina,
because they circulate through
these various computers
around the world.
And my computer at home
could have been infected,
but when I interact with a
business entity, whatever virus
is in my computer is transmitted
to that business entity,
and then it is vulnerable.
>>NOORY: Well, we've got
an antiquated grid system.
So how easy would it
be, at least cyber-wise,
to start shutting down
some of the systems.
>>AKART: Well, the
SCADA system, S-C-A-D-A,
is the most-used operational
system of our critical
infrastructure.
It's been around for
many, many years.
In essence, we have outgrown
the original power grid.
We've added to it.
We've put more power lines
and transformers and things,
and we've expanded our grid.
But because it's all
interconnected, you could
create this cascading
effect, whereby you take down
one substation, and as
the other substations
try to react through
this computer system,
everything gets overloaded and
takes the whole system down.
And recently, you
may know, there
was a Freedom of
Information Act request
provided to the government about
something called the Aurora
Experiment.
And in the government's--
>>NOORY: Wisdom?
>>AKART: --wisdom response,
they provided the wrong report
as a result of
that FOIA request.
And that request disclosed
publicly nine substations that,
if they were coordinated
and attacked--
>>NOORY: Bang, bang, bang.
>>AKART: The whole
thing would collapse.
Now, Texas might be saved.
You have the Eastern Connected
Grid and the Western Connected
Grid.
And then you have--
>>NOORY: There are
three grids, right?
>>AKART: Right, Texas.
East and west are connected.
Texas is not.
And that's just
part of the Texas--
>>NOORY: Mentality.
>>AKART: Yeah, they're very
independent down there.
But they do that because
in a demand for power--
like if Denver has major
snowstorms for several weeks,
you may not be able to generate
the power in this area.
So what they do is they then
bring power from elsewhere.
Because the consumer
demands it all the time,
and they demand it
to be inexpensively.
Those energy companies
who are trying
to comply with
consumer demand have
created this monster for us.
As I say, it's America's
soft underbelly.
The threat is from
various sources--
the sun, nuclear
weapons, cyber attack.
But the end result is
the same, and that's
a collapse of the power grid.
>>NOORY: Elon
Musk, of course, is
trying to develop a
system for your home
that is self-contained.
I think that's genius.
>>AKART: It's not difficult,
having solar panels,
or if you live in
a certain area,
you might be able to
have wind or whatever.
The problem is the expense.
To create a solar array
that would sustain
an average household
under normal circumstances
so you can operate
your refrigerator
and washer and dryer, et
cetera, costs tens of thousands
of dollars.
If it became more affordable, I
think more people would do it.
>>NOORY: A couple
thousand dollars,
everybody would get it done.
Build it into the mortgage.
>>AKART: Yeah, they could
build it into the mortgage.
The government
tries to encourage
people to take on
solar arrays by doing
a couple of things, number
one, providing tax credits.
Well, that's nice, but
unless you have the ability
to make the
underlying investment,
a tax credit doesn't
do you any good.
And then the second
thing they do
is they try to
allow people to sell
their excess
solar-generated power back
to the grid for pennies
on the watt, et cetera.
Those are all admirable, but
if it was more affordable,
I think you'd find more people
would do these types of grids.
>>NOORY: How many
people are prepared
for a situation like this?
Let's take a look.
>>How long would I last with
what I've got in my apartment
right now?
Probably about 15 minutes,
I imagine, maybe 20.
>>If the power were to
shut down right now,
I would say we could
survive for about a week.
>>Actually, a fairly long time.
I live up in Maryland, and power
going out is a regular thing.
So it's not a big deal.
>>Yeah, I think it would kick
in a different side of me,
a survival mode-ist me.
If the electricity ran
out, I could probably
go for a couple of days.
>>If the power went out
now, I could probably
last a week from the
things I have in my home.
I have some candles.
I have some firewood.
>>NOORY: Bob, just that
small group of people,
only one person thinks
he could get by.
>>AKART: And he's wrong.
At least the others admit
three to seven days.
And they would be surprised
that that probably isn't true,
either.
But then what?
After that three to seven
days, what are you going to do?
The gentleman that says, oh, I
can make it no problem, I think
is delusional.
Because you never
realize how much
you rely upon the, whether
it be medications or food.
You can't get water
out of your sinks.
So yeah, some people can
survive longer than others.
For the people who say three
to seven and admit that,
what are they going
to do about it?
If at the end of three to seven
days, when they run out of food
and there's no FEMA truck
backing up with bottles
of water, I mean, I've seen
incidents in recent years
where you had the Flint,
Michigan, situation
with the water supply.
And there was one
in West Virginia.
People were fighting in the
parking lots over a case
of 24 bottles of plastic water.
And that was within days.
So what's going to
happen after seven days
when her baby is hungry?
>>NOORY: Looting, everything.
We've seen what has
happened in cities just
with civil unrest, the
looting and the breaking
of the windows.
Law and order is out of control.
>>AKART: And they
would be overwhelmed.
And consider this as well.
Law enforcement-- I love them.
They protect us.
They do the best they can.
But first thing on
their minds will be,
I need to protect my family.
How many law enforcement
officers are going to say,
why do I want to go into
the city in riot gear
and have rocks thrown at me
or maybe even being shot at,
when my wife and
children are at home,
and they could be
looted or attacked?
So I think you'll find a
collapse of that as well.
No matter how hard we try to
clamp down in a collapse event,
eventually a lot of the
military and law enforcement
will go to protect their own
rather than lose their life.
>>NOORY: And what you're
going to see, too,
Bob, is a tiered system,
where for the first couple
days of an outage, people
think they can get by.
And then it's going
to get a little worse
and a little worse, and
then all of a sudden,
it's out of control.
People think, for example,
all you have to do
is go to your faucet
and turn on the water.
Well, there are electrical
pumps pushing that water
through the system
to get to your house.
When those go down, ain't
gonna be any water coming out
of that spigot.
>>AKART: That's right.
And they'll be desperate for
water, because water is life.
And if you go three days
without it, you will die.
So they will be looking
for water sources that
may not be safe.
And one of the things I've
studied as part of my fiction
series is we'll be flown into
a third-world status, 1800s,
for example.
So what's one of the
biggest causes of death
in these third world countries?
And it's dysentery.
People who are
thirsty will think
they can drink water out of a
stream that could be polluted,
out of a lake.
Who knows?
The first thing they're going to
do is get deathly ill, nausea,
diarrhea, which will make
them even more dehydrated
and expedite the death process.
You cannot go more than
three days without water,
and you can't go more than
three weeks without food.
During that time, I think
people will become desperate.
>>NOORY: Oh, it's something.
So we've talked
about solar flares.
We've talked about
cyber warfare.
Now let's talk about EMP,
which is Electromagnetic Pulse.
And I notice, Bob, how you
pick the St. Louis Arch.
Thanks a lot.
>>AKART: You're welcome.
Your beloved St. Louis--
I apologize for that.
>>NOORY: But tell
us what an EMP is.
>>AKART: Well,
Electromagnetic Pulse
is a naturally occurring
event, as we've talked about.
>>NOORY: With the sun.
>>AKART: As a result
of the solar flare.
But as a result of the hydrogen
weapon testing in the '40s
and then into the
late '50s, especially
on the Pacific
Ocean, the scientists
began to discover that these
nuclear weapons created
this pulse of energy that caused
their instruments to fail.
So they actually started testing
specifically for that purpose.
And one of the most
well-known tests
was in 1962 called the
Starfish Prime Test, which
occurred near Hawaii.
And Honolulu, which is about
1,600 miles away from where
the test occurred, lost power.
A lot of their components
and instruments
there failed as a
result of this EMP.
At that point in time,
all the major powers
recognized that
this was dangerous.
And that kind of hastened after
the nuclear proliferation stage
was over that we need
to come to agreement
of this mutually-- the MAD
system of Mutual Assured
Destruction.
If you shoot at us, we'll shoot
at you, and then nobody wins.
One of the things
that I've discussed
with people is, does the
MAD doctrine, as I call it,
does that apply in the case of
an EMP, who does it apply to?
I believe that both
Russia and China
recognize that if they were
to shoot an EMP at us, that we
would have--
>>NOORY: We would to them.
>>AKART: We would retaliate.
>>NOORY: And it
would be even worse.
>>AKART: It would be worse.
But what about that next tier
of countries who do not like us
that have nothing to lose?
And I use Iran--
>>NOORY: North Korea.
>>AKART: And North Korea.
Great examples.
If you look at the Far East,
Japan, North Korea, and all
of those areas, at night
from an Earth satellite,
you'll see a very big dark spot.
That dark spot is North Korea.
That's a country
that's backwards.
That's a country that
isn't in the 21st century.
They have nothing to lose.
>>NOORY: But they know
how to launch missiles.
>>AKART: They do.
>>NOORY: And they have nukes.
>>AKART: They have recently
tested their hydrogen weapon,
which in the press
initially was debunked
as saying, well, this wasn't
capable of doing anything.
But I think they were
testing their ability
to detonate an EMP weapon.
Now, the problem with
the North Koreans
is they don't have an
ICBM missile that's
stable enough to shoot
from their continent
to the United States.
>>NOORY: But what it
you put it on a ship?
>>AKART: What if you
put it on a freighter?
They have sent freighters into
the Gulf of Mexico undetected.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>AKART: They could
certainly shoot 800 miles
from the Gulf of Mexico to
the center of the country, St.
Louis, Kansas City, for
example, and detonate it
above the Earth.
Or they could launch it
from a satellite, which
they have successfully
launched, and, in fact,
proved to us that
they can control it
by sending it directly over
the Super Bowl, as they said.
>>NOORY: Well, that was our
concern on their most recent
satellite launch, were because
they said the payload was
bigger than normal.
They weren't quite so sure
what might have been up there.
>>AKART: Yes.
And so this lack of
intelligence on our side
should put us on alert and
should take our Congress
and the president to a point
where we need to do something.
Because the North Koreans
are a threat to us.
The Iranians are a threat to us.
The way we have treated
them geopolitically
is beyond my comprehension.
But then let's take
it one step further.
You have a group like ISIS
that people don't really
understand what they are.
But as you and I discussed,
it's a terrorist group
that's worth $2 billion
that makes $2 million a day
on human trafficking in the
sale of oil on the black market.
They can buy what
they can't create.
And they could certainly
buy the ability
to take a freighter undetected
into the Gulf of Mexico as well
and bring mighty
America to its knees.
>>NOORY: If the lights
go out, what would life
be like for a lot of people?
Let's take a look.
>>What would life be like after
a massive and prolonged power
outage?
It would be pretty
hectic, I think.
Although I kind of yearn for it.
I mean, I kind of yearn
for simpler, perhaps
more primitive times, like
living off the land and farming
or something.
Although I have no skill
or expertise in that area.
So I'd probably-- I'm a
skinny guy, so I'd probably
be one of the first to go.
>>It would be chaotic
for a period of time.
And then I think it would
also be reinvigorating
for communities to
reorganize themselves
on a true intimate level.
>>Oh, people would go crazy.
I feel like people would
like kill each other.
And cannibalism would
start happening and lots
of craziness.
But I think it would also
force us to actually take
care of the Earth and
connect with the Earth
and learn how to grow
food and how to actually
take care of ourselves
on a basic level
and not be so dependent
on these outer sources.
And it would kind of like
weed out the weak ones
that can't do that.
So I think it would
be kind of awesome.
>>I think people would panic
because they were unprepared.
And we're so spoiled by
the things that we have
and the luxuries that I think
it would be super chaotic.
>>NOORY: Some people,
Bob, are a little
naive about this
entire situation.
I mean, for the
first couple days,
I think it's easy for
all of us to prepare.
I mean, I've talked about it on
"Coast to Coast," where you get
some food for a couple weeks.
You get enough water put away.
And that's good
for the short term.
But what are we going to
do about the long term
if the power grid is gone
for a year or two years?
They don't have enough
transformers, for example,
to bring into the country.
What do we do if
it gets that long?
Honestly, we're up
a creek, aren't we?
>>AKART: Most people will be.
And so you have to
plan ahead and think
about, where will I go?
Now, a lot of folks might think
they can just head out I-70 out
into the country or, in
my neck of the woods, go
and the farmers will take me in.
They won't.
>>NOORY: You think we
have traffic jams now
in Los Angeles?
>>AKART: Exactly.
>>NOORY: Wait till this happens.
>>AKART: That's exactly right.
And the thing about--
what will be interesting,
you'll have small communities
that will band together.
And then they'll
close their borders.
And when the golden hordes,
as they're referred to,
come out of the city
looking for food and water,
they'll find that
they're not welcome,
because people will
take care of their own.
Those who think
they're just going
to go out and start a
garden and feed themselves
are very naive, as you say.
First off, they probably
have never tried to grow food
and wouldn't have
the first clue--
>>NOORY: Well, and it
takes time to grow food.
>>AKART: It takes time.
It takes seeds.
>>NOORY: You gotta eat tomorrow.
It's going to take you three
months to grow some tomatoes.
And that's not going to last
you too long, especially
if your neighbor steals them.
>>AKART: That's right.
The process of prepping
is three steps.
Number one, protect yourself.
Number two, have sufficient food
and water and medical supplies
to last until you can start
growing and harvesting
and canning your own food.
And then to have
long-term food storage
to supplement what you
won't be able to take
in now as nutrients.
And it could be simple like
beans and rice and pastas,
et cetera.
But you want to be able
to have a short-term plan,
a mid-term plan, and
a long-term plan.
And it's really not that
involved and that expensive.
It's just a matter of
deciding it's important.
And people can undertake
that process very easily.
>>NOORY: Now, if the
power system goes down
in the dead of winter when
it's 5 degrees above zero,
what do you do there?
You're out of luck.
How do you heat your house?
Your pipes begin to break.
Everything falls apart.
>>AKART: You have to have
alternative heating sources.
And this is where I'd suggest
to people, if you can,
consider reducing your
lifestyle and moving
to an area that's more rural.
>>NOORY: How many
people can do that, Bob?
>>AKART: They can if
they're committed.
Now, I understand that you may
have a fabulous job working
for the bank in downtown LA.
But what you might
consider doing
is moving out into an
area and take a lesser pay
and maybe sell one of your cars
and move into a smaller home.
It's just a matter
of how important
is it to you to be prepared
for an event like this.
And not everybody
is willing to do
that, which is why the
EMP Commission said
90% will not survive.
>>NOORY: The biggest
problem, I think,
it is that people don't
believe it could happen.
>>AKART: Yes.
The threat is real.
That's why I wrote the books.
Because the books
tell in great detail
not only the history behind
cyber warfare and EMP,
but then also the
real-life instances
of how these things
have been used.
But then the most
important part, I believe,
is where I tell people the
very realistic, simple steps
that you can take
to get prepared.
>>NOORY: Well, that's good.
I don't want to be the
presenter of doom and gloom,
but, folks, if the
grid goes down,
we are in serious,
serious trouble.
I advise you all to write your
congressperson, your senator,
and demand that we
pass legislation
to insulate our power grid
from a solar flare, a cyber
attack, or an EMP.
Bob, thanks for being
on "Beyond Belief."
>>AKART: Thank you, George.
>>NOORY: Let's get it done.
>>AKART: Yes.
[THEME MUSIC]